`NexusVisitor` and `Annotator` architecture (#777)
FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools: docs/how-tos/pynxtools/implement-a-visitor.md

# Implement a custom NexusVisitor

!!! info "This guide assumes familiarity with the visitor pattern in pynxtools. Read [pynxtools architecture](../../learn/pynxtools/architecture.md) first."

`NexusFileHandler` accepts any `NexusVisitor`, making it straightforward to add new HDF5 processing modes without modifying `pynxtools` internals. This guide walks through implementing a minimal custom visitor.

## When to write a custom visitor

Write a custom visitor when you need to process every node of a NeXus file in a way that is not covered by the built-in `Annotator`. Common use cases:

- Collecting statistics over all fields (e.g. value ranges, missing data)
- Extracting a specific subset of nodes for further processing
- Implementing a custom export or transformation
- Linting files against local conventions

## The visitor interface

> `NexusVisitor` is an ABC. Concrete subclasses must implement all four hooks; implement hooks that are not needed as `pass`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`NexusVisitor` is an abstract base class. Concrete subclasses must implement all four hooks; implement hooks that are not needed as `pass`:
```
